[WIP] Static matrix design doc December update (#29)
stan-dev/design-docs: designs/0005-static-matrices.md

- Feature Name: static_matrices
- Start Date: April 30th, 2020
- RFC PR: [Example Branch](https://github.com/stan-dev/math/compare/feature/var-template)
- Stan Issue: [#1805](https://github.com/stan-dev/math/issues/1805)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This proposes a generalization of the reverse mode autodiff type in Stan Math,
`var_value<T>`, where `T` is the underlying storage type of the autodiff variable.
For `T == double`, this type is equivalent to the current Stan Math `var` type.

The usefulness of this type comes from setting `T` to more general data structures,

> in particular the Eigen Matrix types. Instead of dealing with matrices of vars,

Reviewer: Suggestion:

1. Move the "The usefulness..." sentence to the paragraph above and add a paragraph break after it. It'd be nice to have the usefulness of the proposed generalization right along with the introductory paragraph.

2. This allows the second paragraph to focus on the point about matrix of vars vs var_value of matrix. Suggested replacement to make it clearer (please feel free to ditch, change, etc.): "Instead of dealing with matrices of `var` (`Eigen::Matrix<var>`), this allows operations in the Math library to be written in terms of a generalized var of matrices (`var_value<Eigen::Matrix<double>>`)." And then continue with the next sentence.

this allows operations in the Math library to be written in terms of vars that are
themselves matrices.

This makes working with matrix variables in Stan autodiff much faster. This design
is fully backwards compatible with the curren Stan autodiff types and those remain.

> For the rest of this proposal, "autodiff" means "reverse mode autodiff".

Reviewer: Two things:
1. Typo: the period goes within the quotation mark... so the correction is: `"reverse mode autodiff."`
2. It'd be good to add that the rest of the proposal, we'll leave off the `stan::math` namespace. Suggested sentence: "For brevity, we will omit the `stan::math` namespace where it's clear from the context." (or something like that?)

> With optimizations from the compiler the conditions for a `matrix` to be a

Reviewer: @bbbales2, some clarity here? I'm not sure what this paragraph means. Also, why is `matrix` written as code here, but not in other uses?

Author: I think that was a danging sentence from the editing process. Removed.

constant matrix can be detected and applied to Stan programs automatically
for users.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Currently, an `N x M` matrix in Stan is represented as an Eigen matrix holding
a pointer to an underlying array of autodiff objects, each of those holding
a pointer to the underlying autodiff object implementation.

The basic Eigen type used by Stan is `Eigen::Matrix<var, R, C>`. For brevity,

> this will be referred to as a "matvar" type (a matrix of vars). There are no

Reviewer: I think it'd help for readability to just use code styling for both `matvar` and `varmat`. It's done below in a couple spots and for consistency and being able to spot it in text, I think it might be useful.

Author: Yeah, I will do this.

I originally wanted to avoid `varmat` because `varmat` is not real code and `var` s are and I don't highlight them.

major differences between a matrix of vars or a vector of vars or a row vector
of vars.

This proposal will enable an `N x M` Stan matrix to be defined in terms of one
autodiff object with two separate `N x M` containers, one for its values and
one for its adjoints.

This basic example of this type is `var_value<Eigen::MatrixXd>`. For brevity,

> these will be referred to as "varmat" types (a var that is a matrix). Again,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
these will be referred to as "varmat" types (a var that contains a matrix). Again,
```

there are no major differences when the matrix is replaced by a vector or a row vector.

The motivation for introducing the varmat type is speed. These types speed up
computations in a number of ways:

1. The values in a varmat are stored separately from the `adjoints` and can
be accessed independently. In a matvar the values and adjoints are interleaved.

> With how memory loads work on modern cpus, that means reading the values requires

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With how cacning and memory loads work on modern CPUs, that means reading the values requires
```

> reading the values and the adjoints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
reading the pointers, the values and the adjoints.
```

Author: I want to leave the pointer point to point number 2

Reviewer 2: I think pointers are relevant here as well - they are extra data that needs to be transfered.

Author: I added a bit about the pointers

2. To read all `N x M` values or adjoints of a varmat requires one pointer

> dereference and `N x M` double reads. Reading a similar matvar requires
> `N x M` pointer dereferences and `N x M` reads.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dereference and `N x M` double reads. Reading a similar matvar requires
2 pointer dereferences and `N x M` reads.
```
Just pointer to vari and in vari the pointer to the array in arena memory.

Author: This one is matvar, not varmat, so each vari we access requires a pointer dereference and we can't assume varis are stored near each other or anything.

Reviewer 2: if we are counting memory transfers than it is `2 x N x M`, because values are transferred into the cache as well.

Author: Good point, I forgot the 2

3. Memory is linear in varmat, and in the best case interleaved in matvar
(though because every element is a pointer, in worse case matvar memory accesses

> are entirely random).

Reviewer 2: Another advantage of linear memory layout is that vectorized memory access instructions can be used to access it. This is a precondition for Eigen doing any vectorization.

4. Because values and adjoints of a varmat are each stored in one place, only
two arena allocations are required to build an `N x M` matrix. matvar requires

> `N x M` allocations.

Reviewer 2: That is true, but it does not matter that much.

Author: True, but I'm also not sure I should delete it. Can though if you think it's distracting. It's certainly not as important as the others.

Reviewer 3: I think it's fine to leave. It is a performance cost that I think will show up in large sizes

than matvar because the memory difficulties with pointer-chasing and strided
accesses are more acute on GPUs than CPUs.

See [here](https://github.com/stan-dev/design-docs/pull/21#issuecomment-625352581)
for performance tests on a small subset of gradient evaluations using varmat and
matvar types.

matvar has two advantages that varmat does not duplicate. These are listed
here to motivate the backwards compatibility of this proposal with matvar:

1. matvar types are more compatible with existing Eigen code. For instance, it is possible
to autodiff certain Eigen decompositions and solves with matvar types that will
not work with varmat types.

2. It is easier to assign individual elements of a matvar to another variable -- this
can be done by writing a new pointer over an old pointer. Assigning elements to a varmat
can be done, but it requires either matrix copies (slow, and not implemented), or
adding extra functions on the reverse pass callback stack (implemented and discussed later)

# Math Implementation
[math-implementation]: #math-implementation

At this point versions of `var_value<T>` types have been implemented for `T` being an

> Eigen dense type, an Eigen sparse type, an Eigen expression, a double, or a GPU type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Eigen dense type, an Eigen sparse type, an Eigen expression (a limited number of expression types are supported at the moment), a double, or a `matrix_cl` (matrix with data on OpenCL device - usually a GPU).
```

varmat to all the non-multivariate distribution functions.

## Assigning a varmat

Something in the original design doc that is not necessary anymore is the limitation
that subsets of varmat variables cannot be assigned efficiently.

The efficiency loss was so great in the original design (requiring a copy of the entire
varmat) that this idea was discarded completely.

There is a strategy available now to assign to subsets of varmat variables that is
more efficient than this.

The idea is that when part of a varmat is assigned to, the values in that part of the
varmat are saved into the memory arena before being overwritten, and a call is pushed
onto the chaining stack that will restore the values back from the arena and set the
respective adjoints of the varmat entries to zero.

The assumptions that makes this work is after a subset of a varmat is overwritten,
that part of the varmat cannot be used in any further calculations, and so the adjoints
of that part of the matrix will be zero in the reverse pass at the time of assignment.

This means that assignment into a varmat would invalidate any views into that

> varmat's memory.

Reviewer 2: I would not say invalidates. Just the change is visible in views. Also I don't think you explained anywhere what views are.

Author: I still like invalidates, but it's not a segfault or anything to read the view. Perhaps a segfault would be better though since it would prevent inadvertent bugs, so I'm not sure. I changed it.

enough was clear from the initial discussions of how to handle the Math implementation
regardless of how the language was handled.

At this point, the Math maturing to the point that it is possible to compile a model using
varmats values with a development version of the Stanc3 compiler (available
[here](https://github.com/stan-dev/stanc3/pull/755), though it may take some effort to run since
it is a work in progress). This Stanc3 compiler defines any variable with a name ending in
`_varmat` to use a varmat type.

A basic bernoulli MRP model with five population level covariates and seven group terms is available
[here](https://github.com/bbbales2/computations_in_glms/blob/master/benchmark_model/mrp_varmat.stan).

The initial varmat implementation of this model achieves a per-gradient speedup of around two.

Now that varmat variables can be assigned, it is possible that the compiler silently replace every
matvar in Stan with a varmat, and none of the standard Stan use cases would be affected.

There are four major implementation strategies available at the Stanc3 level.

1. Implement a new Stan type to differentiate explicitly between matvar and varmat types

> 2. Use matvar types whenever there is any function in the Stan program that does not support varmat

Reviewer 2: Once all the functions support varmat this is the same as 4.

Author: I don't think we'll ever reach the 100% conversion point.

Author: I added a note that 2, 3, and 4 all become the same thing if varmat is supported everywhere.

would also need to be some automatic, under the hood conversions between the types. This automatic
converting would make it so that if a varmat is forgotten anywhere, the entire program will be
slowed down. This sort of explicit typing shouldn't be too much of a problem in development models
or generated Stan code, but in large, user-written models this would be error prone to implement
and maintain.

The advantage of #2 is that it would allow programs that can be written using only varmat functions
to be very fast (and not even worry about any conversion to matvar or not). The problem with this
implementation is that, the difference between `varmat` and `matvar` would again need documented
at the user level and some notation would need added to the user manual to indicate if a function
is or is not available for optimization.

The advantage of #3 is that varmat and matvar types could be implemented without any extra
documentation for the user. Similarly to #2, if the user uses functions only available for matvar,
there will be some slowdown as conversions between varmat and matvar are handled, but unlike #2

> the slowdown might not be catastrophic. In this case it would not be as crucial to carefully

Reviewer 2: Which of 2/3 is slower is just speculation. Also I bet it will depend on the model a lot. I would prefer this removed unless you support it by benchmarking multiple models.

Author: Hmm, it is, but also I don't want to say 2 and 3 are the same, cause they're not. The reason to do 3 would be to avoid at least one of:

1. catastrophic slowdowns in 2 where using a weird function with no varmat implementation in one place means the whole program is slow

2. documenting all functions that do and do not support varmat and to what extent (only certain arguments, etc.)

Author: In the end I added the assumption that the matvar parts are cheap. So like, if someone needs one `lbeta` call and that isn't a `varmat` function, then all the matrix operations and stuff don't get converted back to `matvar` -- only the single, assumed relatively cheap function gets wrapped up.

for matrices, instead of being data structures of autodiff types, for the autodiff type
itself to represent a matrix. Operations on these new types can be more efficient than the old
ones, and this design remains fully backwards compatible with the curren Stan autodiff types.

For the rest of this proposal, "autodiff" means "reverse mode autodiff," and all C++ functions
are assumed to reside in the `stan::math` namespace. The necessary namespace will be
included if this is not true.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Currently, an `N x M` matrix in Stan is represented as an Eigen matrix holding
a pointer to an underlying array of autodiff objects, each of those holding
a pointer to the underlying autodiff object implementation.

The basic Eigen type used by Stan is `Eigen::Matrix<var, R, C>`. For brevity,
this will be referred to as a `matvar` type (a matrix containing var variables).
There are no major differences between a matrix of vars or a vector of vars or
a row vector of vars.

This proposal will enable an `N x M` Stan matrix to be defined in terms of one
autodiff object with two separate `N x M` containers, one for its values and

> one for its adjoints.

Reviewer 3: I think this would clean up a bit with some pseudocode examples. I think you can take (1) and (2) that you have written below and include them in the example for matrix multiplication

-------------------------

Currently, Stan represents matrices as an `Eigen::Matrix<var, Eigen::Dynamic, Eigen::Dynamic>`. There are no major differences between a matrix of vars or a vector of vars or a row vector of vars. The internal representation of an Eigen matrix is a pointer to an array.

```cpp
// pseudo class representing the storage of a dense matrix
template <typename T>
class DenseStorage {
  T* data_;  
};
```

Stan math's reverse mode autodiff (`var`) is a smart pointer type that itself points to an underlying object (`vari`) that actually holds the values and adjoints that Stan math uses when calculating gradients.

```cpp
// pseudo class holding the values and adjoints used in reverse mode AD
class vari {
  double val_;
  double adj_;
};

// pseudoclass that represents that stores the pointer to the underlying vari
class var {
  vari* vi_;
}
```

This means that for Eigen matrices of type `Eigen::Matrix<var, Eigen::Dynamic, Eigen::Dynamic>` it's internal representation is a pointer to an array of pointers.

```
// pseudo class that shows equivalently what the compiler sees
class DenseStorage {
  vari** data_;  
}
```

This becomes problematic with both pointer chasing and memory access. Typically when Stan math performs operations over matrices it will want all of the values of a `vari` for one part of an operation and the all the adjoints of another `vari` in another part of an operation. This can be wasteful as to fetch just the values or adjoints we need to go through the pointer of pointers and load both the values and adjoints into cache. And unless the value and adjoints are used together in the same operation then the CPU is also seeing non-contiguous data.

This proposal will enable an `N x M` Stan matrix to be defined in terms of one
autodiff object with two separate `N x M` containers, one for its values and
one for its adjoints. This is represented as a `var_value<Eigen::Matrix<double, Eigen::Dynamic, Eigen::Dynamic>>`.

```cpp
// pseudo class for matrix vari
template <typename T>
class vari_value {
  Eigen::Map<T>* val_;
  Eigen::Map<T>* adj_;
}
// pseudo code representing var matrix
template <typename T>
class var_value {
  vari_value<T>* vi_;
};
```

This storage scheme allows for less pointer chasing while providing contiguous memory access to values and adjoints. For instance, when performing the reverse mode pass for matrix autodiff the calculation for propagating the adjoints of each input requires accessing the values of the other input

```cpp
A.adj() += result.adj() * B.val().transpose();
B.adj() += A.val().transpose() * result.adj();
```

With an Eigen matrix of var types this means that each multiplication in the above requires the program to fetch both the values and adjoints from the pointer to the array of pointers for both `A` and `B` when calculating either adjoint. Furthermore this makes those values non-continguous in the operation and so the compiler will not be able to use advanced instruction sets such as SIMD multiplication.

However, switching to a `var_value` with the values and adjoints separated into two arrays means that both adjoint calculations will only be fetching the values or adjoints they need in the operation. And those values and adjoints will be contiguous so that the compiler has a much better opportunity to utilize advanced instruction sets when performing the calculation.

Author: Thanks, I agree the C++ is useful for showing what the types are. I reordered some stuff and dropped the DenseStorage things.

Reviewer 3: Why did you drop the densestorage? I think it's one of the bigger points that the vari** impl causes a bunch of pointer chasing. I prefer just having that laid out simply because idt it's obvious at first

Author: Fair, I'll add something back.

dereference and `2 x N x M` double reads. Reading the values and adjoints
of a similar `matvar` requires `N x M` pointer dereferences and `2 x N x M` reads.

3. Memory is linear in `varmat`, and in the best case interleaved in `matvar`
(though because every element is a pointer, in worse case `matvar` memory accesses
are entirely random). The linear memory in `varmat` means that they can use
vectorized CPU instructions.

4. `varmat` is a more suitable data structure for autodiff variables on a GPU
than `matvar` because the memory difficulties with pointer-chasing and strided
accesses are more acute on GPUs than CPUs. Linear memory also helps make the
communication between the CPU and GPU efficient.

5. Because values and adjoints of a `varmat` are each stored in one place, only
two arena allocations are required to build an `N x M` matrix. `matvar` requires
`N x M` allocations.

See [here](https://github.com/stan-dev/design-docs/pull/21#issuecomment-625352581)
for performance tests on a small subset of gradient evaluations using `varmat` and
`matvar` types.

`matvar` has two advantages that `varmat` does not duplicate. These are listed

> here to motivate the backwards compatibility of this proposal with `matvar`:

Reviewer 3: I don't really like using the shorthand `varmat` and `matvar` here. I think we should just say "An Eigen matrix with a scalar var type" and "a var type that uses Eigen matrices as storage."

Author: Ooof, that was hard to edit in, so I kept the shorthand. I think this notation has been handy during development, so I like it for the design document.

`varmat` also includes such things as a view into another `varmat`, or an autodiff type on a GPU, etc. It's sort of imprecise, but it's handy that way (and `varmat`/`matvar` shorthands now come after a section with C++ examples and talking specifically about the details of the two implementations)

Reviewer 3: We only use varmat / matvar because we type it a 100 times a day :-P but for defining a tech spec idt we should use shorthand verbage like that

Author: Was re-reading the last doc comments, a very early reference to something like varmat and matvar was Bob: https://github.com/stan-dev/design-docs/pull/21#discussion_r418700776 . So maybe it makes sense to people outside too? Anyway, this one I want to roll with until it's a problem.

1. `matvar` types are more compatible with existing Eigen code. For instance, it is possible
to autodiff certain Eigen decompositions and solves with `matvar` types that will
not work with `varmat` types.

2. It is easier to assign individual elements of a `matvar` to another variable -- this
can be done by writing a new pointer over an old pointer. Assigning elements to a `varmat`
can be done, but it requires either matrix copies (slow, and not implemented), or
adding extra functions on the reverse pass callback stack (implemented and discussed later)

# Math Implementation
[math-implementation]: #math-implementation

At this point versions of `var_value<T>` types have been implemented for `T` being an
Eigen dense type, an Eigen sparse type, a limited number of Eigen expressions, a double,

> or a `matrix_cl`, a matrix with data stored on an OpenCL device (targetting GPUs).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
or a `matrix_cl` which is a matrix with data stored on an OpenCL device (targeting GPUs).
```

> As var previously, `var_value<T>` is a PIMPL (pointer to implementation) type. The
> implementation of `var_value<T>` is held in `vari_value<T>`, and the only data a
> `var_value<T>` holders is a pointer to a `vari_value<T>` object.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As before, `var_value<T>` is a PIMPL (pointer to implementation) type. The
implementation of `var_value<T>` is held in `vari_value<T>`, and the only data a
`var_value<T>` holds is a pointer to a `vari_value<T>` object.
```

`stan::test::test_ad(...)` test. The tests for `log_determinant`, available
[here](https://github.com/stan-dev/math/blob/develop/test/unit/math/mix/fun/log_determinant_test.cpp)
are typical of what is done.

`test_ad_matvar` checks that the values and Jacobian of a function autodiff'd with
`varmat` and `matvar` types behaves the same (and also that the functions throw
errors in the same places). `test_ad_varmat` is not included by default in `test_ad`
because not all functions support `varmat` autodiff.

`test_ad_varmat` also checks return type conventions. For performance, it is assume
a function takes in a mix of `varmat` and `matvar` types should also return a `varmat`.

A complete list of `varmat` functions is planned for the compiler implementation.
As an incomplete substitute, a list of functions with reverse mode implementations
that are being converted to work with `varmat` is here:
https://github.com/stan-dev/math/issues/2101 . A pull request
([here](https://github.com/stan-dev/math/pull/2214)) is up that adds support for
`varmat` to all the non-multivariate distribution functions.

## Assigning a `varmat`

> A limitation from the original design doc that is no longer necessary is the limitation
> that subsets of `varmat` variables cannot be assigned efficiently.
> 
> The efficiency loss was so great in the original design (requiring a copy of the entire
> `varmat`) that this idea was discarded completely.
> 
> There is a strategy available now to assign to subsets of `varmat` variables that is
> more efficient than this.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A limitation from the original design doc that is no longer necessary is the limitation that subsets of `varmat` variables cannot be assigned efficiently. The efficiency loss was so great in the original design (requiring a copy of the entire `varmat`) that this idea was discarded completely. There is a strategy available now to assign to subsets of `varmat` variables that is more efficient than this.
```

The language implementation of `varmat` is yet undefined. It was left unresolved because
enough was clear from the initial discussions of how to handle the Math implementation
regardless of how the language was handled.

At this point, the Math maturing to the point that it is possible to compile a model using
`varmat`s values with a development version of the Stanc3 compiler (available
[here](https://github.com/stan-dev/stanc3/pull/755), though it may take some effort to run since
it is a work in progress). This Stanc3 compiler defines any variable with a name ending in
`_`varmat`` to use a `varmat` type.

A basic bernoulli MRP model with five population level covariates and seven group terms is available
[here](https://github.com/bbbales2/computations_in_glms/blob/master/benchmark_model/mrp_`varmat`.stan).

The initial `varmat` implementation of this model achieves a per-gradient speedup of around two.

Now that `varmat` variables can be assigned, it is possible that the compiler silently replace every
`matvar` in Stan with a `varmat`, and none of the standard Stan use cases would be affected.

There are four major implementation strategies available at the Stanc3 level.

> 1. Implement a new Stan type to differentiate explicitly between `matvar` and `varmat` types

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Implement a new Stan type to let the user explicitly determine whether to use `matvar` and `varmat` types
```

> 2. Use `matvar` types for any function in the Stan program that does not support `varmat`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Use `matvar` if there is at least one function in the Stan program that does not support `varmat`
```

3. Use `varmat` types by default, but if variable assignment is detected, or a `varmat` is used
in an unsupported function convert to and from `matvar` automatically.

4. Use `varmat` types everywhere

The original proposal was leaning towards #1 because it most naturally corresponds to the Math
implementation. However, this leaves the problem of explicitly declaring `varmat` to the user. To
avoid duplicating the user's manual and function reference for `varmat` and `matvar` functions, there
would also need to be some automatic, under the hood conversions between the types. This automatic
converting would make it so that if a `varmat` is forgotten anywhere, the entire program will be
slowed down. This sort of explicit typing shouldn't be too much of a problem in development models
or generated Stan code, but in large, user-written models this would be error prone to implement

> and maintain.

Reviewer 4: 1 also duplicates the list of signatures (longer error messages). Though that can be assumed from the duplicating function reference I guess.

under the hood conversion between `varmat` and `matvar` so that all functions do work with either
type, then that leads to the question, why have the different types at all?

The advantage of #2 is that it would allow programs that can be written using only `varmat` functions
to be very fast (and not even worry about any conversion to `matvar` or not). The problem with this
implementation is that, the difference between `varmat` and `matvar` would again need documented
at the user level and some notation would need added to the user manual to indicate if a function
is or is not available for optimization.

The advantage of #3, similarly to #2, is that `varmat` and `matvar` types could be handled
automatically by the compiler. If the user requires functions only available for `matvar`,
there will be some slowdown as conversions between `varmat` and `matvar` are handled. However,
if the conversions are only used in relatively cheap parts of the computation, then the expensive
parts of the calculation can still try to take advantage of `varmat` types. The difficulty here
is compiler implementation which would need to be more advanced to detect when it could use

> `varmat` and when it would need to convert to `matvar`.

Reviewer 3: Is it possible to, as the compiler is building the program, trace through where an object is used? If so then an alt here is that when the compiler is parsing the AST, if it sees that a matrix is only going through functions supported by varmat and is not single cell accessed or read from, then the compiler can just swap out the `Eigen::Matrix<var>` with `var_value<Eigen::Matrix>`

pinging @rybern, is this a feature we have in the optimization stuff for the compiler?

Reviewer 4: Yes, that is possible, we do that for OpenCL. This is part of transform MIR.

Reviewer 4: But before we go that direction we need to see how much single cell access affects performance and compare that with the cost of a varmat-> matvar.

Reviewer 3: > Yes, that is possible, we do that for OpenCL. This is part of transform MIR.

Just a sanity check, do we also check the path of the result as well? Since `var<matrix>` functions return var matrices we need to traverse the whole path for the object

> But before we go that direction we need to see how much single cell access affects performance and compare that with the cost of a varmat-> matvar.

@t4c1 would you have any time to make benchmarks for this? I might be able to later in the week. My guess is that it's a big difference

Reviewer 4: We need to do multiple passes then if we want to traverse.

Reviewer 3: ^yeah that's what I mean, we need to have the ability to do multiple sweeps. ftr I have no idea if that's possible or reasonable in the compiler

variables to `matvar` variables and back again when used in functions that do not support `varmat`.
In the limit that all functions can be written to support `varmat`, then #2, #3, and #4 become

> equivalent.

Reviewer 4: 4 was kind of meant more in the sense switch to `varmat` when we get everything in Math and scratch `matvar`.

Author: This is simpler than #3 though right? This is like #3, except we don't try to be smart about making stuff a `varmat` or a `matvar`. We just, as much as possible, make things `varmat` types.

If this doesn't make sense to you as a proposal we should change it though lol, cuz this was my interpretation of a list you made :P.

Reviewer 4: No, I meant it as "wait till everything it varmat" and then just switch to it. It's not a good option, I just wanted to present all cases.

Author: Okay, I'll remove this one then. If it's not realistic and we don't want to do it, we shouldn't worry about listing it.

We haven't truly listed all options, so let's not worry about that (for instance, we could also stick with `_varmat`).

Reviewer 4: Ok yeah, good point.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Discussions:
 - [Efficient `static_matrix` type?](https://discourse.mc-stan.org/t/efficient-static-matrix-type/2136)
 - [Static/immutable matrices w. comprehensions](https://discourse.mc-stan.org/t/static-immutable-matrices-w-comprehensions/12641)
 - [Stan SIMD and Performance](https://discourse.mc-stan.org/t/stan-simd-performance/10488/11)
 - [A New Continuation Based Autodiff By Refactoring](https://discourse.mc-stan.org/t/a-new-continuation-based-autodiff-by-refactoring/5037/2)

> [JAX](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/Common_Gotchas_in_JAX.html#%F0%9F%94%AA-In-Place-Updates) is an autodiff library developed by Google whose array type has similar constraints to the constant matrix type proposed here.

Reviewer 4: There are no constraints with vatmar now.

pointer to `N x M` vars on the heap. Because vars are themselves just pointers
to varis, the current Stan matrix class is represented internally as a pointer
to pointers.

When Stan performs an operation on a matrix it will typically need
to read all of the values of the matrix at least once on the forward autodiff
pass and then update all the adjoints at least once on the reverse autodiff
pass. This can be slow because the pointer chasing required to read a pointer to
pointers data structure is expensive. The can be wasteful because fetching just
the values or adjoints ends up loading both the values and adjoints into cache
(since they are stored beside each other). Stan vectors and row vectors are
implemented similarly and present the same problems.

This proposal will enable an `N x M` Stan matrix to be defined in terms of one
autodiff object with two separate `N x M` containers, one for its values and
one for its adjoints. Filling in the templates, the storage of a
`var_value<Eigen::MatrixXd>` is effectively:

```cpp
template <>
class vari_value<Eigen::MatrixXd> {
  Eigen::MatrixXd value_;
  Eigen::MatrixXd adjoint_;

> }

Reviewer 3: I'd put this back to the way I wrote it because on a first glance this code is going to leave dangling memory in `Eigen::MatrixXd`. I would go the opposite and just explain that we can use allocate the memory in our stack allocator but use `Eigen::Map<>` to act as if these are normal Eigen matrices

Author: I'm gonna add a note in t he comments. It won't actually leak memory cause it's not being allocated in the `arena` according to this code either :D.

The difficulty of C++ psuedo-code is it's basically guaranteed to be wrong (unless it's a copy of the implementation). Vague pseudo-code is nicer cause you have wiggle room.

But ofc. this discussion came up the first round too: https://github.com/stan-dev/design-docs/pull/21#discussion_r421806784

And I see Bob made comments that it was sort of inappropriate to just link C++ implementations like I've done here.

template <>
class var_value<Eigen::MatrixXd> {
  vari_value<Eigen::MatrixXd>* vi_; // pointer to implementation
};
```

The full, contiguous matrices of values or adjoints can be accessed with only
one pointer dereference, eliminating the two prime inefficiences of the

> `Eigen::Matrix<var, Eigen::Dynamic, Eigen::Dynamic>` implementation.

Reviewer 3: It's still two pointer dereferences in the implementation. The main benefit is that we only have to  dereference twice will for the vari** we have to double a double dereference on each lookup
